---
layout: post
title:  "Virtual Reality and The State of Virtual Input"
date:   2015-02-08 10:18:00
---

The future of virtual reality is looking very promising but no one seems to be doing a good job at solving how we interact with these virtual worlds. Last month was an impressive reveal of new technology in virtual and augmented reality. At CES the floor was full of virtual reality headsets - with lots of Samsung Gear VR clones - and two weeks later Microsoft showed off their impressive demo of Hololense. Virtual reality is improving at an impressive rate, however the way we interact with the virtual world is still a mystery.

Most of the Oculus demos do not have a way for the person to interact with the world. They're "on wheels" being guided through the world while only being able to look around. Other examples use a game controller or a keyboard to move the person through the world. Few things make you feel less immersed in a virtual world than having to press "X" to open the door infrot of you.

In the Hololense demo that Microsoft showed the person was able to walk around the room and view the ‘holograms’ in 3d space. Wired wrote about another demo where they were walking round mars. Hololense seems to do a good job at allowing the person to walk around and view the augemented virtual world. Unfortunately the demo of someone interacting with the world was underwhelming. The gesture input appeared delayed and unpredictable at times. The pieces you could interact with were rather large and fine detail interactions weren’t shown at all.  Also, the actions were very “gesture heavy” instead of natural actions. The entire event was impressive - but heavily scripted.

There are a handful of companies that actively trying to solve how we interact with the virtual world. Leap Motion certainly is the big player making strides in this space. However after using Leap Motion I felt disappointed at it’s responsiveness.  Reviewers have called it an "admirable distraction but not useful for truly productive usage”. I agree that it does not live up to the hype. The first version of Leap Motion was released in mid 2013 and although there hasn’t been any new hardware updates since, the Leap Motion has continued to improve upon on its software. Version 2 of their software was released for public beta in mid 2014 which boasts much faster and accurate responsiveness. I wonder if your hands still have to float perfectly in the “sweet spot” for it to work.

Last year a small team of four developers started Nimble VR and became the first real competitor to Leap Motion. As quickly as they appeared, they were acquired by Oculus. I hadn’t heard of Nimble VR until the acquisition. They have an impressive demo video of Nimble running beside Leap Motion and showing much more accurate hand tracking. However, I don’t believe that Nimble and Leap Motion are going about solving the problem the right way. If the problem is accuratly tracking hands in three dimensional space, then putting on electronic gloves would give you far more accurate results than using a depth-field camera (which is proving to be unreliable). If people don’t have a problem strapping a big headset on their head, like the Oculus Rift, then they wont have any problem also putting on gloves to enhance their virtual experience.

Of course, hand tracking is not the only way you could interact with the virtual world. Moving around a big world is also a problem virtual reality will face. Virtuix Omni created a multi-directional treadmill called the Omni Treadmill in 2013, but has yet to ship a final version after many months of delays. Unfortunately, the demo footage of the Omi Treadmill still appears clunky and is definately too  

However, here’s the thing: there’s a very good chance that a simple Xbox controller is “good enough”. When people play video games they're still very immersed in the world regardless of the fact they’re using controller. Player’s are accustomed to mapping their actions to buttons on a controller. We may actually find that people prefer using a controller to using finiky gesture controls. The fact that Oculus aquired the team that built the Xbox 360 controller makes me feel like they may have reached the same conclusion.
